COMP 5893M Modelling And Animation A1
Professor Hamish Carr
October 28, 2024
Overview
This assignment is worth 50% of the overall module mark, and is intended to
build your experience with geometric modelling and processing. In the first
part, you will build a directed-edge data structure and use it to test a variety
of surfaces to determine whether or not they are manifold. In the second,
you will take an input mesh and repair it, then simplify it.
Time
The time budget for this assignment is 50 hours. It will be due at the end
of Week 9. By the middle of Week 5 (the second week of lectures in this
module), you will have seen the material needed for building and testing the
data structure, enabling you to start the assignment.
The assignment will be marked out of 50 overall, as shown in the per question
mark allocation.
Coding Standards
All code submitted must compile with the stages of compilation in the
readme.txt file accompanying the code handout, at the first attempt, on the
University’s Red Hat lab machines. Students will normally be given exactly
one chance to fix compilation issues, but this is not guaranteed.
All code submitted must be written by the student themselves, with no
outside assistance of any kind, unless written approval is obtained from the
1
instructor in advance. Students are permitted to use the code handed out,
and the following libraries: OpenGL, OpenMP, Qt and the C++ STL.
Students are expected to apply professional coding standards, including mean
ingful variable names, well-structured OO classes, and meaningful comments.
Poor coding practices will attract a penalty of up to 20 marks out of the 50
available.
Marking Standards
When the assignments are marked, at least one data file other than the ones
provided will be used for testing. Make sure your code does not make any
unnecessary assumptions.
1 Task I: Directed Edges [10 marks]
You have been given a simple GUI application that reads in a geometric
object stored as triangle soup and renders it on screen. Rendering is not
needed for this task, but it has been provided to make your task easier.
You have also been given a set of sample triangle soup files with the suffix
“.tri”, where the first line is the number of triangles (n), followed by 3n
triplets giving the coordinates of each vertex.
You should: a) [5 marks] Write a program called ‘face2faceindex’ that reads
in a .tri file, computes the face index format and outputs a file with “.face”
suffix in the format provided in Appendix I of this assignment.
b) [5 marks] Write a second program called ‘’‘faceindex2directededge’ that
reads in a .face file, computes the directed edges and outputs a file with
“.diredge” suffix in the format in Appendix II.
You are expected to produce command-line utilities rather than a visual
application. This is because, in the real world, you will need to convert file
formats once rather than every time you load. If you wish, you may also
modify the code handed out to read in a .face or .diredge file and render it
directly to cross-check, but this is not required. It is recommended that you
start with the smallest files provided and work your way up in size.
2
2 Task II: Manifold Testing [10 marks]
For each file provided determine whether it is manifold or not. If it is not,
print out the ID number of the edge or vertex that fails. Report your results
in a text file called ‘manifold test results.txt’
3 Task III: The Euler Formula [5 marks]
For each mesh that you have demonstrated to be manifold, use the Euler
formula to determine the genus of the surface. Add this to the ‘’‘mani
fold test results.txt’ file.
4 Task IV: Mesh Repair [10 marks]
You have been provided with a file with a model of the instructor’s head.
However, there are some holes in the mesh, as you will discover if you run
your manifold testing code on it. You are, however, guaranteed that there
is only one connected component, and that no other form of mesh repair is
required.
Your next task, therefore, is to repair the mesh. You should iterate through
the mesh, finding unpaired edges. When you find an unpaired edge, you
should use the directed edge data structure to walk around the boundary of
the hole to find how many edges are involved.
You should set the position of the vertex to the average of the values of the
vertices on the boundary of the hole: i.e. to their centre of gravity.
Once there are no holes in the mesh, this task is complete, and you should
output the file in the same format in which you read it in. Note that the code
should deal with all of the holes automatically, rather than by user input.
5 Task V: Simplification [15 marks]
You should now have a single manifold surface, and need to simplify it with
the standard greedy algorithm. For each vertex, you should compute the
mean and Gaussian curvatures using the Discrete Laplace-Beltrami Operator
as discussed in class.
3
At each step, remove the vertex with smallest Gaussian curvature- this is
normally one of the flattest vertices in the mesh. Remember to check for the
Eulerian condition to preserve the manifold.
4